y (Cyanocitta cristata) is a passerine bird in the family Corvidae, native to
North America. It is resident through most of eastern and central United States,
although western populations may be migratory. Resident populations are also
found in Newfoundland, Canada, while breeding populations can be found in
southern Canada. It breeds in both deciduous and coniferous forests, and is
common near and in residential areas. It is predominantly blue with a white
chest and underparts, and a blue crest. It has a black, U-shaped collar around
its neck and a black border behind the crest. Sexes are similar in size and
plumage, and plumage does not vary throughout the year. Four subspecies of the
blue jay are recognized. The blue jay mainly feeds on nuts and seeds such as
acorns, soft fruits, arthropods, and occasionally small vertebrates. It
typically gleans food from trees, shrubs, and the ground, though it sometimes
hawks insects from the air. Like squirrels, blue jays are known to hide nuts for
later consumption.[2] It builds an open cup nest in the branches of a tree,
which both sexes participate in constructing. The clutch can contain two to
seven eggs, which are blueish or light brown with brown spots. Young are
altricial, and are brooded by the female for 8–12 days after hatching. They may
remain with their parents for one to two months. The bird's name derives from
its noisy, garrulous nature.[3] It is sometimes called a "jaybird".[4] The blue
jay was first described as Pica glandaria cærulea cristata in English naturalist
Mark Catesby's 1731 publication of Natural History of Carolina, Florida, and the
Bahamas.[5] It was later described as Corvus cristatus in Carl Linnaeus' 1758
edition of Systema Naturae.[6] In the 19th century, the jay was described by
French ornithologist Charles Lucien Bonaparte in 1838 as Cyanocorax cristatus in
A geographical and comparative list of the birds of Europe and North America,[7]
and given its modern scientific name Cyanocitta cristata by Hugh Edwin
Strickland in 1845.[8] The genus name Cyanocitta derives from the Greek words
'kyaneos' (blue) and the 'kitta' and 'kissa' (chattering bird, jay), and the
term 'blue chatterer' refers to the bright blue plumage of the head, nape, back,
and tail of the bird. The specific name cristata (crested, tufted) derives from
Latin referring to the prominent blue crest of the jay.[9] The blue jay measures
22–30 cm (9–12 in) from bill to tail and weighs 70–100 g (2.5–3.5 oz), with a
wingspan of 34–43 cm (13–17 in).[10][11] Jays from Connecticut averaged 92.4 g
(3.26 oz) in mass, while jays from southern Florida averaged 73.7 g (2.60
oz).[12][13] There is a pronounced crest on the head, a crown of feathers, which
may be raised or lowered according to the bird's mood. When excited or
aggressive, the crest will be fully raised. When frightened, the crest bristles
outwards, brushlike. When the bird is feeding among other jays or resting, the
crest is flattened on the head.[14] Its plumage is lavender-blue to mid-blue in
the crest, back, wings, and tail, and its face is white. The underside is
off-white and the neck is collared with black which extends to the sides of the
head. The wing primaries and tail are strongly barred with black, sky-blue and
white. The bill, legs, and eyes are all black. Males and females are almost
identical, but the male is slightly larger.[11][15] As with most other blue-hued
birds, the blue jay's colouration is not derived from pigments but is the result
of light interference due to the internal structure of the feathers;[16] if a
blue feather is crushed, the blue disappears because the structure is
destroyed.[10] This is referred to as structural colouration. The blue jay
occurs from southern Canada through the eastern and central United States south
to Florida and northeastern Texas. The western edge of the range stops where the
arid pine forest and scrub habitat of the closely related Steller's jay (C.
stelleri) begins. Recently, the range of the blue jay has extended
northwestwards so that it is now a rare but regularly seen winter visitor along
the northern US and southern Canadian Pacific Coast.[10] As the two species'
ranges now overlap, C. cristata may sometimes hybridize with Steller's jay.[17]
The increase in trees throughout the Great Plains during the past century due to
fire suppression and tree planting facilitated the western range expansion of
the blue jay[18][19] as well as range expansions of many other species of
birds.[20][21][22] The northernmost subspecies C. c. bromia is migratory,
subject to necessity. It may withdraw several hundred kilometres south in the
northernmost parts of its range. Thousands of blue jays have been observed to
migrate in flocks along the Great Lakes and Atlantic coasts. It migrates during
the daytime, in loose flocks of 5 to 250 birds. Much about their migratory
behavior remains a mystery. Some are present throughout winter in all parts of
their range. Young jays may be more likely to migrate than adults, but many
adults also migrate. Some individual jays migrate south one year, stay north the
next winter, and then migrate south again the next year. To date, no one has
concretely worked out why they migrate when they do. Likely, it is related to
weather conditions and how abundant the winter food sources are, which can
determine whether other northern birds will move south.[23] The blue jay
occupies a variety of habitats within its large range, from the pine woods of
Florida to the spruce-fir forests of northern Ontario. It is less abundant in
denser forests, preferring mixed woodlands with oaks and beeches.[14] It has
expertly adapted to human activity, occurring in parks and residential areas,
and can adapt to wholesale deforestation with relative ease if human activity
creates other means for the jays to get by.[24] Four subspecies are generally
accepted, though the variation within this species is rather subtle and
essentially clinal. No firm boundaries can be drawn between the inland
subspecies. The ranges of the coastal races are better delimited.[15] The blue
jay is a noisy, bold and aggressive passerine. It is a moderately slow flier
(roughly 32–40 km/h (20–25 mph)) when unprovoked.[25] It flies with body and
tail held level, with slow wing beats. Due to its slow flying speeds, this
species makes easy prey for hawks and owls when flying in open areas. Virtually
all the raptorial birds sympatric in distribution with the blue jay may predate
it, especially swift bird-hunting specialists such as the Accipiter hawks.
Diverse predators may predate jay eggs and young up to their fledging stage,
including tree squirrels, snakes, cats, crows, raccoons, opossums, other jays
and possibly many of the same birds of prey who attack adults.[26] The blue jay
can be beneficial to other bird species, as it may chase predatory birds, such
as hawks and owls, and will scream if it sees a predator within its territory.
It has also been known to sound an alarm call when hawks or other dangers are
near, and smaller birds often recognize this call and hide themselves away
accordingly. It may occasionally impersonate the calls of raptors, especially
those of the red-tailed and red-shouldered hawks, possibly to test if a hawk is
in the vicinity, though also possibly to scare off other birds that may compete
for food sources.[23] It may also be aggressive towards humans who come close to
its nest, and if an owl roosts near the nest during the daytime the blue jay
mobs it until it takes a new roost. However, blue jays have also been known to
attack or kill other smaller birds and sleeping, foliage-roosting bat species
such as Lasiurus borealis.[27] Jays are very territorial birds, and they will
chase others from a feeder for an easier meal. Additionally, the blue jay may
raid other birds' nests, stealing eggs, chicks, and nests. However, this may not
be as common as is typically thought, as only 1% of food matter in one study was
bird material.[23] Despite this, other passerines may still mob jays who come
within their breeding territories. Blue jays, like other corvids, are highly
curious and are considered intelligent birds. Young individuals playfully snatch
brightly coloured or reflective objects, such as bottle caps or pieces of
aluminum foil, and carry them around until they lose interest.[27] While not
confirmed to have engaged in tool use in the wild, blue jays in captivity have
been observed using strips of newspaper as tools to obtain food,[23][28] while
captive fledglings have been observed attempting to open the door to their
cages.[29] Blue jays have strong black bills which they use for cracking nuts,
usually while holding them with their feet, and for eating corn, grains and
seeds. Its food is sought both on the ground and in trees and includes virtually
all known types of plant and animal sources, such as acorns and beech mast, weed
seeds, grain, fruits and other berries, peanuts, bread, meat, small
invertebrates of many types, scraps in town parks, bird-table food and rarely
eggs and nestlings.[23] Blue jays will sometimes cache food, though to what
extent differs widely among individuals.[30] Although seemingly contentious in
their general behavior, Blue jays are frequently subservient to other
medium-sized birds who visit bird-feeders. In Florida, Blue jays were dominated
at feeders by Eastern gray squirrels, Florida scrub-jays, common grackles and
red-headed woodpeckers, all of which were occasionally observed to aggressively
prevent the jays from feeding.[23] The mating season begins in mid-March, peaks
in mid-April to May, and extends into July. Any suitable tree or large bush may
be used for nesting, though an evergreen is preferred. The nest is
preferentially built at a height in the trees of 3 to 10 m (9.8 to 32.8 ft). It
is cup-shaped and composed of twigs, small roots, bark strips, moss, other plant
material, cloth, paper, and feathers, with occasional mud added to the cup. Blue
jays are not very picky about nesting locations. If no better place is available
– e.g. in a heavily deforested area – they will even use places like the large
mailboxes typical of the rural United States.[24] They also appropriate nests of
other mid-sized songbirds as long as these are placed in suitable spots;
American robin nests are commonly used by blue jays, for example. Blue jays
typically form monogamous pair bonds for life. Both sexes build the nest and
rear the young, though only the female broods them. The male feeds the female
while she is brooding the eggs. There are usually between 3 and 6 (averaging 4
or 5) eggs laid and incubated over 16–18 days. The young fledge usually between
17–21 days after hatching.[27] After the juveniles fledge, the family travels
and forages together until early fall, when the young birds disperse to avoid
competition for food during the winter. Sexual maturity is reached after one
year of age. Blue jays have been recorded to live for more than 26 years in
captivity and one wild jay was found to have been around 17 and a half years
old.[31] A more common lifespan for wild birds that survive to adulthood is
around 7 years.[citation needed] Beyond predation and the occasional collision
with man-made objects, a common cause of mortality in recent decades has been
the West Nile Virus, which corvids as a whole seem especially susceptible to.
However, despite several major local declines, overall blue jays have not seemed
to have been depleted by the disease.[26] Blue jays can make a large variety of
sounds, and individuals may vary perceptibly in their calling style. Like other
corvids, they may learn to mimic human speech. Blue jays can also copy the cries
of local hawks so well that it is sometimes difficult to tell which it is.[32]
Their voice is typical of most jays in being varied, but the most commonly
recognized sound is the alarm call, which is a loud, almost gull-like scream.
There is also a high-pitched jayer-jayer call that increases in speed as the
bird becomes more agitated. This particular call can be easily confused with the
chickadee's song because of the slow starting chick-ah-dee-ee. Blue jays will
use these calls to band together to mob potential predators such as hawks and
drive them away from the jays' nests. Blue jays also have quiet, almost
subliminal calls which they use among themselves in proximity. One of the most
distinctive calls of this type is often referred to as the "rusty pump" owing to
its squeaky resemblance to the sound of an old hand-operated water pump. The
blue jay (and other corvids) are distinct from most other songbirds for using
their call as a song. In old African American folklore of the southern United
States, the blue jay was held to be a servant of the Devil, and "was not
encountered on a Friday as he was fetching sticks down to Hell; furthermore, he
was so happy and chirpy on a Saturday as he was relieved to return from
Hell".[33] The blue jay was adopted as the team symbol of the Toronto Blue Jays
Major League Baseball team, as well as some of their minor league affiliates
too. Their mascot is Ace, also a blue jay. The blue jay is featured in Mark
Twain's "A Tramp Abroad", Chapter 3 "Baker's Blue-Jay Yarn". The blue jay is
also the official mascot for Johns Hopkins University. One of the main
protagonists of the Cartoon Network show Regular Show is an anthropomorphic blue
jay named Mordecai. The blue jay is the provincial bird of the province of
Prince Edward Island in Canada.
